In recent years,
we’ve enjoyed watching The Inside Story,
and it really has helped us to get to know
some of the students a little better
and to get “the inside story.”
So let’s enjoy this presentation
of The Inside Story
as presented by one of the other lecturers,
or the instructors, in Gilead,
Brother Richard Chilton.
All of us have a story.
But how is that story written?
A literal book contains
a beginning, a middle, and an end.
And by the time
we hold that book in our hand,
each chapter
has been carefully analyzed and locked-in.
That story is done, finished.
Well, what about us?
Do you ever feel that your story
is pretty much locked-in, finished?
that the opportunity to make changes
in connection with your service to Jehovah
has passed you by?
If so, please pay special attention
to what our guests
have to share with us today
on this edition of The Inside Story.
The first couple we would like to introduce
is Tomáš and Eva Maruška from Slovakia.
Well, Tomáš and Eva, it is so nice
to have you with us
on this edition of The Inside Story.
Welcome!
Thank you very much.
Now, we understand that you both grew up
in a country that was under ban.
Can you tell us a little bit about that?
We remember growing up
when the group was under ban,
and a change came later in 1989,
at the end of the year.
And then finally in 1993,
the work was officially registered
as Jehovah’s Witnesses.
During a ban,
all the things are very different
from what we know today.
For example, there are no assemblies
and no conventions at all
held publicly like today.
Of course, no Kingdom Halls
were available at that time.
So how did you hold your meetings
if there were no assemblies
and no Kingdom Halls?
So I remember
that they were held in small groups
in the private homes of our brothers,
and usually they were held
very late in the evening.
So as children,
we really struggled to stay awake
and not to fall asleep during a meeting.
Under those circumstances,
how did you handle the matter of literature?
So there were no officially printed
and imported publications
from our organization.
It was forbidden under ban.
However, we had homemade publications.
I remember growing up
with the book My Book of Bible Stories.
It was a transcript of the stories
but with no pictures.
So we had to really use our imagination
and just imagine all those stories.
That was also in our family.
Tell us a little bit
about your side of that story too.
Yeah, it’s very similar, I think.
My parents were involved
in literature production.
It was either by typing or by photography.
Now, when you were both children
and growing up under this environment,
were you allowed into these rooms
where this printing was taking place?
So we were very curious as kids.
And, of course,
we still tried to figure out what was inside.
We called it the secret room
because all the secrets were kept there,
and there was this equipment
for making copies of literature.
A simple camera took a photo,
and then with a magnifier,
they could make a different size
of the publication—smaller.
It was easier for the friends
to carry to meetings
and also easier to hide, of course.
Now, Eva, it went beyond
this secret room in the attic in your house.
There was another method
that your parents used
in connection with this literature.
Can you tell us about that?
Yeah, actually, this literature
needed to be transported somehow
to the groups that were using
the publications or to the families.
So my parents did it in a way
where they put the publications
in the back seat of the car,
behind the back seat of the car.
Now, did you and your siblings know
this literature was in the car?
No, we had no idea.
You didn’t know.
They couldn’t tell us.
And there was also a way
where they put it under our feet.
And actually, we are six kids,
and I am the youngest,
so they put like four or five
or six of us in the back seat of the car.
We were sitting there patiently
and, you know, those cute little faces
don’t look like smugglers.
Well, it’s obvious your parents
were thinking it through to protect everyone
and to keep the work going.
That must have been very interesting,
growing up under those circumstances.
Let’s move now into your teen years
and your early adult life.
What were some of the circumstances
that you had observed
that affected your view, or attitude,
toward regular pioneering
and just the full-time service in general?
So when I was growing up,
we had no regular pioneers at all
in our congregation
and just very few in our area.
Was there any particular reason why
there were so few pioneers in your area?
I would say that it took time to introduce
and to understand the concept of pioneering.
Sometimes other spiritual goals
were considered as more important
because during a ban,
nobody was really preaching publicly.
So it took time to understand this concept
and to really have pioneers
in the congregation.
And I remember that the first one
whom I really met
and had the chance to work
with was when I was 16.
At the time,
three special pioneers
were assigned to our congregation:
one couple and one single brother.
And that single brother
was accommodated in our home.
So for us, as two boys, it was really
like having an older brother at home,
a spiritual single brother pioneering.
So we could really see our first pioneer
in flesh and blood
(to see him alive),
and we could observe his goals.
And he spent a lot of time with us.
So about how old were you then, Tomáš,
when you started regular pioneering yourself?
So it was three years later.
It was when I was 19.
I was the first one in our congregation.
I tried, but at the time,
there was still very little support.
We had just four regular pioneers
in the whole circuit.
So then after several months,
I was struggling with the quota
and several challenges came.
So I decided to quit pioneering
because I came to the conclusion
that it’s not really for me,
so it’s probably for others.
What about in your case, Eva?
Actually, I never—
Growing up, I never had really
any idea what pioneering meant.
So I didn’t have a real need
to start pioneering.
The first time I started pioneering
was when we were already married,
and I set a goal to do it for one year.
But then also I stopped after one year.
OK, now you’re in your adult life here.
What came next?
So I would say
that this was a turning point in our country
—when we got several couples
as missionaries.
And they really brought zeal,
the pioneer spirit from congregations
where they were pioneering for decades.
And this had a really nice influence
on the congregations
and also the circuits.
You had mentioned, Eva,
that when the missionaries came,
you mentioned a specific effect
they had on the rest of you.
You want to tell us about that?
Well, I think it was huge.
They just woke us up.
They showed us what pioneering means
—that you can really enjoy the ministry.
Yeah, we remember
their enthusiasm for the ministry.
And it was really catchy
to hear these missionaries,
and they were struggling with the language.
So they were just learning Slovak
—speaking broken Slovak.
But they identified young couples
and really invested their time and energy.
They gave us a lot of their free time,
not just during the ministry.
We made great friendships with them,
and until today,
we have great relationships with them.
And you had mentioned
when you were out in the ministry with them,
what was something that they showed you
was OK that added to your joy?
Well, this is a very important thing.
They showed us that we can drink coffee
during the ministry
—yeah, good Italian coffee.
Oh, good.
They made it fun for you.
So where did that lead to?
So then later
when we moved to another congregation
and with the nice spirit
and support of the missionaries,
we decided to start as a couple pioneering.
I was around 28 or 29 at this time,
and we decided to start
in the new service year.
We really saw
and really understood what it means
that pioneers produce other pioneers
because within two years,
we had 25 or 26 regular pioneers.
That’s amazing!
And they were supporting, really,
every day the field service meetings.
You never— Sorry.
You were never searching
for service partners.
Anytime you wanted to go in the ministry,
you had a person to go with.
And Jehovah blessed it because after a while,
we had a couple of Bible studies.
We were afraid,
but after we started, it was a nice result
that Jehovah blessed
pioneers in our congregation.
Then what was the next change for you
after you started pioneering?
What came next?
Well, I felt that some change
needed to be done
because I was a little tired of everything.
I was working eight hours a day secularly.
It was full-time work.
It was an international company
where everybody was just concerned
about their career growth
and everything
was about the efficiency in the work.
I was a little afraid to even go—
Nobody ever asked
about reducing their working hours.
It was like,
like the more you worked, it’s better.
So we started to pray about it,
and finally I went and they granted me
that I could work
from eight o’clock in the morning to noon.
But the amazing thing
was that they gave me almost the same salary
as I had for eight hours,
like, for full-time work.
So your salary basically doubled
while doing half the work, right?
Exactly.
How did you take advantage of that?
Well, at the time, the RTO was open.
Yeah, and I was helping with the
construction of that RTO in our Kingdom Hall,
and I started to commute for the RTO
to take care of some technical stuff.
And you were helping us
at the RTO as a commuter.
Yes, I was working
with food service
and with lunch,
but I needed to be there at lunchtime.
So I needed to go back to my employer
and ask to move my work time
to early morning hours.
So I would wake up at 4:30 a.m.
and work until 10:00 a.m.
Actually, when they also granted
this thing to me,
we saw that it was Jehovah behind it
because it was nothing normal
in this environment.
So now with that change, you were able
to fully support the assignment at the RTO.
Yeah, I could commute.
Where did that lead to next?
We were very happy at the time
because we were pioneering.
We were doing a little bit of pioneering
and a little bit of Bethel
because of the RTO,
and we felt that we were doing a lot
because we had to work
and were supporting where we could.
But then we decided to apply
for the School for Kingdom Evangelizers,
and we submitted our application.
There was a convention,
and a couple from Bethel came,
and the brother asked us one question.
We still remember that question:
“Are you willing to serve anywhere?”
And we were like,
“Yes, of course we are willing.”
And he asked us,
“What about Bethel service?”
Well, we never thought about Bethel.
It was quite surprising for us.
But then we thought
about this encouragement,
we prayed about it, and we decided
to submit our applications for Bethel.
And surprisingly, within several months,
we were invited to serve at Bethel.
And so approximately
what were your ages
around this time when you’re finally
now entering Bethel service?
I was 31 or 32.
OK.
And she was younger.
OK, she was younger.
We’ll leave it at that.
Real good.
So when you look back
on your life now,
how do you feel about the adjustments
that you made in your service to Jehovah?
We never regretted any of those decisions,
setting spiritual goals
—start pioneering, support the RTO,
or apply for Bethel service.
Maybe there’s one change we would make.
What is that?
We would start earlier if we could.
Definitely.
Well, there are probably a number of us
that would feel similarly.
But we’re glad
that you did make those adjustments,
and it’s obvious that Jehovah
has blessed you for doing so.
Thank you so much for taking time
to share your wonderful story with us.
It really touched our hearts,
and we appreciate that.
Our pleasure.
Thank you.
Next, we’ll enjoy the company
of José and Andreina Peláez.
Welcome to The Inside Story
for Gilead class 152.
Did you think you would ever hear
those words in your lifetime?
No.
No, never.
In fact, being at Gilead
is the surprise of our lives.
Yes, it is definitely
a surprise we never thought of.
Well, we are certainly happy
to have you with us.
So you came to Gilead from Peru Bethel.
But before that,
your home was Montreal, Canada.
How did that happen?
So I was born in Caracas, in Venezuela,
and that’s where I learned the truth.
When I was born,
my grandmother was a Witness,
so she taught me the truth.
Eventually, my mother got baptized,
so she continued raising me in the truth.
And when I was ten years old,
my family decided to move,
to immigrate, to Montreal, Canada.
So we arrived there
—it was my mother, my brother,
and my unbelieving stepfather.
OK, so you go from Caracas, Venezuela,
to Montreal, Canada, at ten years of age.
How did you wind up in Montreal, José?
I was born in Lima, Peru,
and I heard about Jehovah when I was a child.
The Witnesses would come to my house,
and some of my older brothers
even studied the Bible.
Then when I was a teenager,
because of the political
and economic situation of the country,
my parents decided
to move to Canada, to Montreal, Canada.
My older brother was already living
in Canada, and he was already a Witness.
But suddenly, sadly, soon after we arrived
—a few months after—
my father died.
I’m sorry to hear that.
Thank you.
So my mom and I stayed with my brother,
and at that time,
the congregation helped us a lot
to progress and get baptized.
So I made it a goal
to share my relationship with Jehovah.
Then at the right moment of my life,
I met Andreina and eventually we got married.
What happens next
with you two now that you’re married?
So when we got married,
we were not regular pioneers,
but we had spoken about it.
We definitely wanted
to make ourselves available.
What were you doing then if you
weren’t regular pioneering at that point?
We both had our full-time jobs, and we were,
I mean, we were comfortable
and enjoyed both of our jobs—secular jobs.
So the idea of regular pioneering
was there, like I said.
It was a goal that I previously had,
but, you know, we had a long way to go.
Now, you had mentioned to me earlier
that you were about 16 years old or so
when you first had this goal to pioneer.
Yes.
From 16 to what point
do you finally now reach
entering the pioneer service?
Yes, so we started—
I was in my late 20’s when we started.
I was in my mid-30’s when I started.
We wanted to—
Like we said before,
we wanted to increase our service to Jehovah,
but there were different challenges there
and different adjustments we wanted to make.
And a turning point happened at that time
when we wanted
to expand our ministry (service)
to be more useful in the hands of Jehovah.
The circuit overseer at that time
was Brother John Pappino
and his wife, Sister Carla Pappino,
and they encouraged us very much
to take on regular pioneering.
Yes, I remember being with them
out in the ministry during the week
when they would come to the congregation,
and we’d always make a stop
and go for coffee.
And we would enjoy their experiences
and just that happiness
that we would see in them.
After each visit,
for family worship, we would discuss and see
how we could then simplify our lives.
Because that was it
—we needed to simplify our lives.
And we started by, you know,
regularly auxiliary pioneering.
And we became—
Then eventually, we started
this new chapter of our lives:
We became regular pioneers.
Now you’re in your early to mid-30’s;
you’re in your late 20’s;
and now with that encouragement,
you’re entering the pioneer service.
That’s good.
So did pioneering—?
Once you started pioneering,
is that what now stirred your desire
to want to serve where the need was greater?
Oh no, not at all.
I mean, we always thought
that serving in another country
or where the need is greater
even in the country we were in
was maybe an experience
from the Yearbook,
but not for us.
And we thought that we
just had waited too long probably
to make those types of decisions.
So it was not something
that we thought we could do.
Correct, that’s it.
Many times we thought
that we had waited too long
to start regular pioneering.
So the idea of serving in another country
never came to our mind.
However, another turning point in our life
was the encouragement
of Brother John Pappino and his wife.
Now, you had mentioned to me earlier
that Brother Pappino
gave you an illustration . . .
Yes.
. . . that really got you thinking.
What was that?
Yes.
When we were deciding to move,
there were always fears
(certain fears),
despite the fact
that we had kind of made the decision to go.
So I mentioned this to Brother Pappino
—about the fears we had.
So he gave me an illustration.
He told me:
“Imagine there’s a father,
and in front of him is a table.
“And on top of the table is his child
—his baby child of two years old.
And then all of a sudden,
imagine that the child jumps to the floor.”
And he asked me,
“What do you think
the father is going to do?”
And I said, “Well, he’s going to
right away try to grab his baby
to help him to avoid
hitting his face on the floor.”
And he told me,
“Well, that’s exactly what Jehovah
is going to do if you jump to Peru,
if you step over to Peru.”
So that was beautiful.
And that gave us the strength, you can say,
to achieve
and make our decision
to move to Peru.
So, what an illustration
to get your minds and hearts thinking on it!
Yeah.
Like he said, there were many fears.
And also we had our lives in Canada,
our families.
We had never been away from our families,
but the encouragement we received
definitely made a good impression.
And then we prayed about it.
And yes, we thought
that it was possible for us.
But it was not easy.
We still needed to make certain adjustments.
So Brother Pappino
was always encouraging us.
Yes, he said: “Just try it
for one year or two, just to try it.
“If something doesn’t work,
then you can always come back.
But you can taste what it is.”
What difference did that make for you
—for him to give you that encouragement
to just put it in the context
of just a year or two?
Did that affect your decision at all?
In a way, yes because, you know,
the idea of moving was a big change.
It was a big decision for us.
And having in mind
that we could go for one year
—try it out and then come back—
kind of smoothed the fears, you know.
So that was a good example for us.
And we made the decision to move.
We made certain adjustments in our life,
in our secular work.
We sold our belongings, and we set a date.
We had a date.
We said, “By the end of this year
(that was in 2012)
we need to go to Peru.”
Yeah.
So you got down there,
and where did you go once you arrived there?
We arrived in Lima,
and just a few weeks after,
we moved to Tacna.
This is a city in the south of Peru,
bordering with Chile.
We took a bus from Lima to Tacna.
That was 22 hours of travel
—a trip of 22 hours.
So the south of Peru is desert.
So you could imagine that after five hours,
six hours, seven hours, ten hours,
all I saw on my left was sand,
on my right was sand,
in the back was sand,
and in the front was sand.
So I said to Andreina,
“Where are we going?”
We had no idea it was like that at all.
But eventually, after 22 hours,
we could see the city.
We arrived, and yes,
we were not going to live just on sand.
There was actually a city there.
And that was going to be our new home.
It started at the beginning,
since the first day,
that Jehovah was proving to us
that he was going to be there with us.
And then another door opened for us,
and that was
to apply for the Bible School
for Christian Couples back then.
So when that door opened,
we knew that the idea
of just one year or two in Peru
was going to change.
And that’s what happened.
We attended school
one and a half years
after we arrived in Tacna.
That’s when we were invited.
And then we had received an assignment.
Yes, they gave us the assignment
to serve
as temporary special pioneers in Abancay,
which is in the Andes area of Peru.
So you went
from the desert to the mountains?
Yes.
So how long were you there
in your special pioneer assignment?
It was in total maybe five months.
Yes.
Why so short?
The branch office called us again,
telling us that now we were going to receive
another assignment
to work in the circuit work
—serve in the circuit work—
but the circuit work was going to be in Lima.
So you still had
yet another course adjustment ahead of you.
How long were you there
in the circuit work in Lima?
So after two years
of serving in that circuit,
the branch office called me
and the brother told me
that they wanted to see us
at the branch the next Monday.
So we said: “Fine, we can go there.
We can be there next Monday at 8:00 a.m.”
And he said, “Just make sure to bring
your things to stay two weeks with us.”
Two weeks?
What was going through your mind
when they told you that?
We actually had no idea.
They told us it’s training.
Training.
So we went for two weeks.
Yes.
And then
at the end of the two weeks,
they told us that they extended us
for up to a month.
After one month,
they extended us two months.
After two months,
they extended us six months.
And then when all this happened,
I said,
“Wait a minute
“—two weeks, one month,
two months, six months—
am I entering Bethel in my mid-40’s?”
Yes.
So it was surprising for us.
Yes, and after six months—
Maybe Andreina can say this.
Yes, after six months,
we received a letter that
that was our new assignment,
and we could not believe it.
I mean, like he said, we had passed
that age or reached that age
when normally
you don’t start serving at Bethel.
And so how long
have you been there in the Bethel in Peru?
It’s been six years.
Six years.
Yes.
So how many years, then,
has it been since you left Montreal?
Almost ten years.
Almost ten.
Do you think Brother Pappino
knew what he was doing
when he told you to just try it
for a year or two?
He definitely knew the blessings
that we were going to enjoy in Peru.
And I think the best counsel that he gave us
was to just give it a try for one year
and see how it goes;
it was the best.
And a whole decade has passed since then.
When you look back over those
life course adjustments, how do you feel
about the decisions you’ve made?
Well, we don’t regret any of these decisions.
We just feel so grateful
because from the beginning,
both of our families supported us.
Also the examples
of brothers like that couple,
John and Carla Pappino, everything—
We’ve seen how Jehovah has guided us,
how he has given us blessings
that we never saw coming
—all these new chapters
that we have added into our lives.
We are very happy for that.
Yes, we’re very grateful
to all those brothers and sisters
who helped us along the way.
And like my wife said,
we don’t regret it at all.
We couldn’t do it before,
but Jehovah knew
the specific time.
And looking back,
we can only express our deep appreciation
and joy for Jehovah’s blessings.
All praise goes to Jehovah,
and we are totally convinced
that it’s never too late
to reach out in Jehovah’s service.
Well, we are so proud of you both
for making those course adjustments.
And it’s clear that Jehovah has been with you
and blessing you along the way.
Thank you so much
for sharing your encouraging story with us,
and we pray
for Jehovah’s rich blessing on you
as you continue on in your faithful service.
Thank you for joining us today.
Thank you.
So as you’ve heard,
all four individuals
had to make course adjustments,
step out of their comfort zone,
and take a leap of faith.
Their stories helped us to appreciate
that it is never too late to serve Jehovah
in new and expanded ways.
And when we take that leap of faith
as did these two couples,
what will Jehovah do for us?
Recall Jesus’ words at Matthew 17:20:
“If you have faith
the size of a mustard grain,
“you will say to this mountain,
‘Move from here to there,’
and it will move,
and nothing will be impossible for you.”
You see, unlike a book,
your story is far from over.
It is not locked-in, finished.
There is still time
to make revisions and add new chapters.
And if you take that leap of faith,
Jehovah promises to move mountains
and nothing will be impossible for you.
We look forward to being with you again
on the next edition of The Inside Story.
Well, thank you very much, Brother Chilton
and those who joined you
in this presentation.
It certainly was very encouraging
—wasn’t it?—
for us to see and be reminded that it’s true
that some perhaps start pioneering
in their teenage years
but then others a little later,
so never feel that you are locked-in
to a certain decision.
So, what a good encouragement that was!